Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lab and the MG
by Doctor Philip Cohen. He is Professor of Sociology
at the University of Maryland. He writes about demographic
trends, family structure, the division of labor, health disparities
and open science. And today we're discussing whether generation
labels make sense. I mean labels like the silent
generation baby boomers, Gen X millennials and Gen Z,
whether it makes sense to talk about generations in
that way. So, uh Philip, welcome to the show.
It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Oh, great. Well, thanks for having me. I look
forward to it.
So, just to introduce the topic and perhaps for
people who might not be very familiar with it,
what is a generation label and particularly researchers who
use generation labels, what do they usually mean by
the word generation?
Well, it's interesting that you put it that way
because um they're mostly they're used less by researchers
and more by journalists uh people in marketing and
business. Um uh So, so you can tell I'm
already critical by the way, I say that um
uh but uh what, what they're trying to capture
is um and the in the best case scenario
where they're trying to capture is a collective experience
that people have by virtue of um being born
in a common era, essentially a period of some
kind. Um And I, and, and they, they, they
may be called generations because they um are in
the, in the, in the realm of the length
of a human generation that is, they're not a
minute or a week or a single year. Um
There's something like 15 or 20 years. It varies
depending on who is using the terms. But when
you're talking in that range of a period, you
know, all the people born in a, in a
period of say 20 years, it's, it's, it's, it's
sort of like using the word decade. It's, it's
like a period that is a rec of recognizable
length. Um You know, they're not, they don't really
match the length of human generations, but the idea
is to capture the co the common experience of
people who lived through history um at uh at
the same time at the same age. So that's,
that's, you know, that's powerful. Uh THAT in, indicates
having a certain amount uh in common in your
life
and what, what would be the length of a
human generation.
Well, it totally depends. I mean, some people have
Children when they're 12 and some people have Children
when they're 52. So you have a, you know,
you can have a, you can have a 12
year generation span or a or AAA 50 year
generation span. Um So, uh you know, there's an
average um but II I think it makes sense
to speak of generations in family terms in the
sense that um um I am a um a
third generation immigrant that is my grandparents were immigrants
to my country. Um So, in that sense, it's
not a measure of years, It's a measure literally
of generations within a family. Um uh And, and
so, in that case, you know, you can look
at the average like what is the average age
of, of mothers or fathers when they have Children?
And it would be somewhere in the twenties or
thirties in um in developed societies today. Um So
you could, you could think of the length in
those terms.
Mhm But you, you mentioned there that, of course,
these generation labels that some people use do not
correspond to the average uh reproductive generation in humans.
So is that, is that a problem? I mean,
and in what ways could it be a problem?
Um I, I that's not a, that's not a
fundamental problem. I think the reason they are, they
have sort of in the popular usage where we
talk about silent baby boom, millennial, gen X, millennial
generation Z alpha, whatever we, whatever we're up to
now. Um IN that popular usage, they have gotten
shorter. Um uh In, in that um the baby
boom generation such as called generation. The baby boom
was an 18 year period. Um uh 1946 to
1964 in the United States at least. Um So,
uh but since then they've gotten shorter and it's
reasonable in the sense that um that the, that
the popular attention span has gotten shorter. Um And,
and, and that's not a, that's not an insult.
That also means that things change more rapidly, mostly
because of technology. So, for example, you can talk
about the different generations of the iphone. Um YOU
know, it's 1/7 generation or, or some other piece
of technology or Wi Fi, we've used five G
for uh internet, you know, that's like a new
generation in the technological terms. And so it's generational
in the sense that it's a new period and
it replaces the previous one or the old, the
previous one becomes older and out of date like
human generations. Um Those can be any link, you
know, iphone can come out with a new model
10 times a year if they want to or
their operating system. Um So it, it, it may,
if, if our experiences are determined by these technological
forces. Um Like, you know, we, we can talk
about things that have shaped current young people, like
the introduction of the like button um on Facebook
or Instagram uh or the uh the introduction of
um short video services like Vine or tiktok um
thing, these things have happened in rapid succession and
really changed the dynamics of, of young, of teenage
life basically. So you might think about things that
are like generations but are shorter, but in real
human terms, um in reproductive terms, our generations are
getting longer because the age at childbirth is rising.
Um So, so they're kind of going in opposite
directions
and how do they determine the division between generations?
I mean, does it have any scientific basis or
it's simply arbitrary? And if it's arbitrary, I mean,
are there any specific criteria that people use or?
Um BASICALLY, no. Um And that's really the main,
my main criticism of the whole concept is that
if you're gonna use categories in science or social
science, you have to use categories. Um That's a
key, you know, it's always been a central feature
of science is creating categories out of chaos. Um
uh If you're going to um create categories, you
have to have a reason. And there is no
reason for the um for the division between say
generation X and millennial. I mean, I like to
use the example of um Venus and Serena Williams
where Venus um the older sister is generation X
and Serena is millennial and they're one year apart.
Um So it does not make any sense at
all to, to discuss those siblings who grew up
so close um in the same social milieu as
being from different generations. And the same generation of
their family, the same generation in society, it's nonsensical.
But um what's essentially what happened is that um
it's become a competitive process like in the world
of marketing and business where if you can get
the, if you can, if you can I announce
a new generation and get the label to stick
and become a viral concept, um then you can
um uh then you win and you're, you're, then
you can sell books or other products. So, um
it's a little uh uh you know, it's my
major criticism is that there is no, there is
no reason for the lines drawn between the generations.
Um And for that reason, you really should not.
Um I mean, I could, I could elaborate on
that but one thing that you, we use arbitrary
definitions all the time, for example, years of years
have a have a basis in the solar system.
It's not crazy. But um in, in some, in
some cases, we use years just because data is
arranged that way. We may use hours, weeks, you
know, um or, or uh but, but it's, it's,
if you're going to use them arbitrary definition, you
have to explain this is arbitrary and we're using
it for convenience decades. I use decades all the
time in my research as a first pass through
the data. Um But, you know, in, in, as
a demographer, we use age all the time. Age
is very important how old are people? Um, AND
we tend to use specific ages when it really
matters. Such as, um, if I'm talking about, um,
uh, births, women having births, I'll put women age
15 to 18 in one category 18 is the
age of majority, at least in the USA legal
majority and then 18 to 24. Um, THAT'S kind
of getting most people through the college years and
then after that just five year blocks, 24 to
2930 to 34. And, and to be clear, it's
arbitrary, we're grouping people just for convenience. If the
generations were treated that way, it would make more
sense. But once you create categories, give them names
and fix their boundaries without any basis in uh
reality, then you're really at risk of creating um
false reality.
And isn't it the case that also these labels
that are used uh sometimes worldwide like baby boomers,
Gen X millennials and Gen Z um are mostly
or apply mostly to the U si mean, because
for example, just to give an example, the baby
boom phenomenon didn't happened even in my own country,
Portugal. I mean, because we didn't participate at least
directly in World War Two, we didn't have casualties
like other countries have. And so back in the
fifties, sixties, we didn't really have a baby boom
here. So doesn't it apply mostly to the US
and perhaps a few other countries?
Yes. Well, it is definitely a it's in that
sense, it's an instrument of cultural hegemony. Um OR
imperialism is not, um is not reasonable for the
point of view of science at all. Um You
know, the baby boom, you know, some, a lot
of countries had something like a baby boom after
the war. Um APOLOGIZE for that noise by the
way, that's my rabbit. It's, I don't know if
you can hear that noise. Um um The, the,
the baby boom in the United States began in
1946 not just in 1946 in July of 1946
which really has to do with the timing of
the soldiers coming home from the war. There was
a huge increase in births and it wasn't until
1964 that they went back below that birth rate.
So that's a distinct period. Um, COUNTRIES that didn't
have a baby boom. There's no reason to talk
about the baby boom as a generation. Although they
still lived in that world, it was a post
war world and they may have things in common.
Um, IT was the beginning of the Cold War.
Like if you have a specific reason to group
people that it's always, it's always, you know, it
can always be useful to do that, but you
need to have a reason to do that. For
example, September 11th, the attacks of September 11th in
the United States changed our, uh, government's posture towards
Islam and terrorism and global relations in ways that
did affect other countries also. Um, BUT other countries
had major terrorist attacks that changed their, um, that
changed their perspective. Um, AND so all together that
is sort of an era. Um, BUT to start
it on a certain date or something, it, it,
it, it's worse than arbitrary. You're right because it's
specifically in, from the dominant perspective and, and one
of the problems with the stereotyping of, of generations
is also the dominant group within that, when people
say, oh, millennials, you know, um millennials like avocado
toast or they spend too much money on coffee.
There's a class and race bias in that um
in that um perception of the, of the group,
if you're going to define the whole generation, well,
obviously, you know, millennials in Gaza don't have the
same issue, right? So it's um there's, there's a
um there's a, there's a risk of not just
collapsing reality but collapsing it around the dominant um
perspective.
And uh since I just mentioned, the baby boomers,
do you think that at least perhaps a few
generations that people identify as such would make it
would make sense to group people in that way?
Because for example, the baby boom period, they represent
a distinct demographic event, right? So at least, do
you think that that generation, it makes sense to
talk about it that way and to group people
from 1946 up to 1964 together or not,
it's a reasonable um It, it's a reasonable hypothesis
that they have things in common and we know
that some things they do. For example, you know,
when there's a huge increase in the number of
Children, it created crowding in schools, it created um
certain conditions, it created um a marriage squeeze is
because men like to marry women who are a
few years younger. So when there's a huge increase
in birth rates, all of a sudden, you have
a group of men who have no, not enough
women a few years younger. Um So it's a
squeeze for men or it's a benefit, I suppose
for women if they're straight and looking for older
men. Um So, um yeah, there's a commonality to
the experience of the baby boom and it probably
the fact that the baby boom was 18 years
long um may be why we got off on
this whole generation thing in a way because it
was about the length of a generation. And when
it was over, people sort of started looking for
something to call the next group of people. Um
And it took it, you know, it took a
few years for that narrative to emerge, but eventually
it did. Um And, and the actually the idea
of generation X was sort of like it was
X because it was a forgotten generation. It was
in the shadow of the baby boom, it was
a smaller group. Um And so there was a
logic to the initial roll out of these concepts.
Not like anybody sat down and planned it, but
it emerged culturally with some cultural logic. Um But
you have to be careful. I mean, the baby
boom um did not have one experience on a
lot of dimensions, at least in the US. Um
THE early baby boom. If you were born in
1946 you were had a much higher chance of
serving uh in the Vietnam War than if you
were born in 1964. So for so for so
the the the the early versus the late baby
boom, by the time the late baby boom was
growing up, it was a different world from the
early baby boom. So, in fact, one of the
things that really defines the baby boom is how
much life changed for them. If you look at
women's rights, women's employment and education levels, the difference
between 46 and 64 is totally transformative. Um So
um they shared a common de one common demographic
event, but it's sort of like, um you know,
like I say September 11th, you know, uh people
experience that moment, but you have to really look
at how did that change life forever after that?
Did it change people? You know, if we talk
about the, the pandemic, uh the COVID-19 pandemic, did
that change? Uh How did that affect K people
in early elementary school versus people in high school.
You know, they were all kids during the pandemic
but graduating in 2020 entering the labor market is
very different from entering first grade in 2020. Right.
Yeah. A and do we know if people even
identify themselves with their own supposed generation? I mean,
like, for example, if someone was, was born in
1986 87 and they say, and they look at
someone born in 1990 they say, oh, I don't
have anything in common with this person. I mean,
I would imagine that that phenomenon would be very
common, right? And then perhaps some of that also
has to do with the stereotypes we attach to
each generation. Perhaps someone from 1986 wouldn't want to
be uh grouped together with someone who has particular
stereotypes from the 19 nineties attached to them,
right? Yeah. Uh It's interesting. Um I think, you
know, as the terms have become common um most,
but by no means all people, if you give
them a list of generation names can pick the
one that they're supposed to be part of. Um
Although when you get near the edges, the accuracy
declines quite a bit. There's a good paper by
Andrew Lindner and colleagues about this um where the
people who are in the middle of their generation
are pretty good in their generation according to the
PEW research categories, which is a common, a common
uh framing. Um But one of the things that's
is, uh, when you say people don't identify or
do identify, um, it has to do with youth.
Um, AND so there is a, there's a sense
in which these generations really become vehicles for the
age old, um, problem of kids these days. So
it's always older people talking about younger people and,
you know, so people say, oh, my college, I'm
a college professor. People say, oh, my students today,
um they don't know, you know, they don't read
books or something like that. And so instead of
saying kids these days don't read books, they'll say
generation Z doesn't read books and it's, it's not
really there. They should be speaking about that is
we don't really know if that same group will
not read books when they're 40. Um uh IN
the same way that millennials, you know, read books
when they're 40. Right? So, but so it becomes
kids these days, the stereotype attaches to them and
then in a way they live the rest of
their lives in the shadow of that stereotype. Um
And so there is a sense, there is a
way that people and it, it frustrates me that
people spend a lot of time and energy worrying
about the stereotype. Oh, they say I'm a millennial
but I feel more like I'm generation X or
I'm a late millennial because I, you know, because
I don't own a house, you know, so I'm
more like generation Z or something. And then, and
so this is this, this constant churning and worrying
and debating and arguing about whether or not people
belong in these categories, which are really quite pointless.
Um So it's, I mean, it's life but it's
frustrating sometimes.
Uh And do you think that naming generations or
using generation labels might promote pseudoscience? And if so,
in what ways?
Well, um I think, yes. Um, IT, it's not
necessarily super harmful. Um If you're, if you put,
if you put the alphabetizing the labels is, is
probably helpful. Um Although like I said, generation X
had a specific meaning, like we didn't start with
generation A right? We started with Generation X because
it was sort of the invisible or the absent
or the, you know, the neglected. Um So, you
know, uh uh it's, it's not totally benign but
um if you name them people, like if you
name them, like the greatest generation, um the silent
generation, like you can think of really very silent
members of the silent generation like Martin Luther King
or um you know, not very silent. Um So
uh uh there, there is, I think it just
promotes, you know, if you do research and you
identify characteristics of a group and you can put
some boundaries around it and they fit some model,
then go ahead and give it an appropriate name.
But I would not, I would not based on
some marketing or, or consumer behavior or a particular
piece of technology or the internet or something like
that, identify an entire group and assume that other
uh that, that, that the commonality of their experience
on this one thing like did they have iphones
um extends to the other aspects of their life,
like their labor market experience or their marriage or
family outcomes, right? So, um the, the, the where
it becomes pseudoscience is when you call, you use
the category without empirical justification based on, you know,
either based on nothing or based on one facet
of their lives without um you know, critically thinking
about whether it applies to other aspects of their
lives.
So walk us through perhaps some of the main
stereotypes that people tend to attach to which generation
from the silent generation through baby boomers, Gen X
uh millennials and Gen Z, what are some of
the most common stereotypes associated with each of them?
Um That's actually pretty difficult if you look at
the common popular lists of stereotypes, it's a little
bit like astrology in that they may be self
centered but altruistic, you know, they may, they may
be um they may be lazy but um but
um but extremely dedicated to certain issues. Um So,
but there certainly are, I mean, if you look
at the, the um the transition over time, they've
become more uh more um uh associated with particular
technologies um especially digital technologies. Um THE baby boom
had the baby boom generation had a reputation for
being, um, uh, for driving social change. Um, uh,
IN terms of like protesting the Vietnam war and,
um, uh, and women's rights and civil rights. Um,
AND, um, uh, and then at some point there,
the stereotype of them flipped and they became, um,
you know, old, um, um, lazy liberals who don't
really think critically anymore. And if you think of
like Bill Clinton. So, um, uh you know, it,
it um they, they're not stable in that, in
that way, but it is the case that, you
know, millennials are perceived as having had a hard
life because of the timing of the great recession
and then the pandemic. So, like they've had early
adulthood and middle adulthood have been challenged by these
serious events. Um uh AND, and they, you know,
they have their own, um their own sets of
neuroses and so on that came from that generation
Z is living in this um in this period
of anxiety. And, um you know, this is the
Jonathan hate version from uh uh about so how
social media is ruining their lives and their mental
health. Um And there is, you know, these things
are not, these things are not crazy, they're not
unrelated to experience, but I don't even like to
um to get very specific about the um what
they're supposed to be like. But, you know, I,
I maybe you're playing to get to this. So
tell me if I should um you know, talk
about this later, but you know, the, the concept
of cohort um uh and life course experience uh
is very important and very real, the age at
which you experience historical events um really matters. So
what in demography we call age period and cohort,
you know, you are, you're um you're five years
old uh at the moment that the a certain
historical event happens and you can, you have that
in common with other people who are that age
at that time, that historical moment. So this is
a very important insight. You know, if you had,
if you were, if you were, if you were
12 years old in 2005 versus 12 years old
in 2015, the, the, the, the, the second group
had social media in middle school. Um And it
changed their, you know, it may have changed their
lives forever. If you entered the labor market during
the pandemic, you may earn less for your, the
rest of your life because your first job you
took was not, was not advantageous versus entering during
a boom year. Um So there are ways in
which, you know, that it's important to think about
the, the age at which you encounter historical moments.
Um AND how that casts a shadow or has
momentum through um through people's their lives. So I
anything bad I say about generation concepts should not
be taken to undermine the, the, the the powerful
in insight of, of what we call life course
theory or the idea that the timing of events
affects everything that comes after.
And since you introduced the topic already, the topic
of cohort and life course research, do you think
that generation levels might also affect it in any
way?
Well, um it, they, I think they muddy the
waters um uh like and, but on the other
hand, one reason that they are so powerful and
they have such um currency in the culture, I
think it's because they capture this insight. So it's
a give and take. You know, I think if
you see most serious researchers, the vast majority of
serious researchers would not use these generation cat worries
and especially not with their labels. And if you
think about the terms, you know, the baby boom
is 18 years, millennials are like 16 years, I
don't know, generation Z is maybe only 14 years
and they're changing and they're, but the, the lines
are arbitrary. So we had a um we had
a campaign a few years ago of, of demographers
and other social scientists and we wrote to the
Pew Research Center and we said, you know, we
beg you to stop framing all of your research
in terms of generation labels. Um And they had
been doing that in a way that and they're
very effective science communicators and they do really important
research. Um AND their stuff was very important. Uh
They did subsequently change their practice and they now
only um describe people in generational terms when they
have sort of generational data. That is if you're
just, if you're doing a survey today of people
by age and you say, oh, look, 60 year
olds are more likely to have been divorced than
30 year olds or something like that or more
likely to get their news from print media. Um
You should not describe that in generational terms. Uh
UNLESS you have some longitudinal sense that, that, that
the characteristics of that cohort adhere to them over
time. If you're just doing a survey today and
you say old people read the newspaper and young
people get their news from tiktok, that's age, that's
not necessarily cohort, right? So that distinction is very
important. It becomes a cohort effect or a cohort
phenomenon when that carries with them through their lives
or has some effect um over the course of
their lives. So forcing things into the generational frame
can limit your ability to understand the phenomena you're
actually looking at, I guess, is one way to
put it,
right? And how should cohorts then be delineated? I
mean, in terms of time periods, how do you
look at it?
Yeah. Um Well, like uh our data usually comes
in years. Um And like I said, years have
a basis in the, in the, in the solar
calendar. It's not um you could use a lunar
calendar. Solar calendar makes more sense for our seasons.
Um uh And so, you know, um I start
by putting people in years. Um And then, and
we can see, for example, Children born in January
are different from Children born in December because of
the way society organizes itself in calendar years. Um
So that can be important. OK. So, but if
you look at your 70 71 72 OK? In
fact, even the baby boom, like I said, it
started in July of 1946. But maybe if you
put everybody born in 1946 together, they probably had
a similar experience because they all started school the
same year. Even though the ones born in May
weren't really part of the baby boom, right? So
the calendar is a very powerful thing. OK? Years
are pretty good if you're gonna start grouping them
and trying to define eras and periods. Um I
would start with something that's deliberately arbitrary and clearly
arbitrary like decades. Um And so like, let's just
put them in groups of 10 years and see,
but if you have and then, and then you'll
see, people say things like, well, the seventies didn't
really end until 1982. You know, they'll say based
on fashion or music or something like that. I
know the sixties, you know, the sixties really started
with the first Rolling Stones concert in 1962 or
something, you know, whatever I'm making these up. So
then you can start to see that people start
manipulating the categories. You start, maybe a demographer starts
with decades, but you start thinking critically and socially
and you start to see that maybe the events
you're looking at don't line up that way. Um
And I think the what, what you learn from
that is that it depends on the question you're
asking. So I would start with decades just to
look at the trend over a long period of
time. But as soon as I have a specific
question in mind, how did September 11th affect the
odds of volunteering to serve in the military? How
did the great recession of 2009 affect homeownership? Um,
THEN you can start putting dates around it. Um,
AND, and, and look at the particular thing that
you're studying, I'm studying homeownership. I'm gonna pay a
lot of attention to 2008, 2009 in the United
States. If you know, if I'm studying, um, uh,
uh, uh, public health and, um, uh, career choices
of young people, you know, I'm gonna look at
the pandemic. Um, BUT that comes, that comes from
the research. It doesn't precede the research, um, as
a, as a settled question. So it, it, it
really has to be handled theoretically and empirically not,
not predetermined. I mean, that's just not, that's the
way science should work.
And also looking at people that are supposedly part
of the same generation, isn't it also the case
that we should look into other aspects like their
sociological aspects that affect their own life. For example,
if people are part of different socio economic strata,
I would imagine that they have very different life
experiences and they go through life in many different
ways. So, uh aren't there other factors that we
should look into apart from the specific year or
the specific period they might have been born in?
Yeah, I mean, I think it's worth like when
we talk about age period and cohort um the,
the the thing about period effects is there's sort
of things that affect everybody, right? So recession, everybody
lives in a recession. Of course, recession doesn't bother
Elon Musk in the same way that it bothers
a poor person. Um So, but they're still living,
they're both living in it, right? So you can,
you can look at that as a common experience,
but then you have to think about, ok, how
does this affect them differently? So, one of the
risks, like you, like we said before, of, of
collapsing is that you end up looking at the
dominant category in the group. Um AND, and, and
miss missing others, but like you say, it's also
about essentially different variables. So race and gender, nationality
and socio-economic status may matter more um than the
cohort uh that you're born into for particular questions.
The, you know, another thing that happens is because,
and this is probably changing over time because of
our global and digital culture. Um The idea of
one age group having a unique experience separate from
another one is less the case than it used
to be. That is, you know, I use tiktok.
Um I'm old. Right. I don't use it. Well,
I'm not like it but I like, I look
at tiktok, I make videos of like my pets.
I put them on tiktok like there's no, uh
there's no world where a young person lives in
a tiktok world and an old person completely does
not. Um And so, um uh especially around the
edges, you know, uh uh if you look at,
you know, one of the things that has happened
is that the, the life course, the sequence of
events in the life course, like what we call
emerging adulthood um or something where you school school
career, marriage, Children or whatever sequence. Um I say
whatever because the sequence has become a lot more
variable. Um These things have become less rigidly ordered
um than they were at least at, at one
period in history and also more variable in terms
of the length of these periods we talk about
um delayed uh or delayed adulthood or something where
it's, it's no longer really the case, at least
in the US that people finish can be reliably
said to have you stop measuring their education level
at age 25 right. It used to be the
Census Bureau in the US publishes all their statistics
on education for people aged 25 and older. Assuming
they're done. Well, that's not the case anymore. Um
And I know they know that, but that, that,
that's a traditional category is 25 plus to look
at, at completed education or for, for fertility and
birth rates. You know, it used to be thir,
you know, 39 you know, um a above 39
we're not gonna even measure ferti fertility because um
women don't have babies after age 40. Well, now
it's like, well, how about 49? Um So um
um the, the, the fact that the, the, the
sequences have become less rigid and the periods have
become more um more dispersed and more variable in
terms of their length. Um M meth means that
the, the, the very idea of fixing categories around
them has become harder. And if you are, if
you're unemployed and, you know, single and living at
your parents' house, if you're 36 versus 21 you
have certain things in common, even though you're a
very different age. Now, maybe the 36 year old
now is in a more stigmatized category and um
is more, more ashamed of their status, but in
some ways, they have something in common with a
21 year old who's also living in their parents'
basement. Um And so, you know, the, the idea
of, of fixing it around the birth year doesn't
make sense at that point.
And our generations even official categories or entities. I
mean, earlier, I asked you uh about the researchers
that might use them and you told me that
there's not many researchers out there who, who use
generation labels. It's mostly journalists and specific kinds of
organizations out there. So, are they considered official or?
It's funny people say um uh officially I'm a
millennial but I feel like I'm generation Z or
something. Um um But no, they're not official categories,
at least not in the US. And I don't
not aware that they are anywhere else. Um You
know, the baby boom was a demographic event and
that is, um which produced baby boomers in the
sense of people who are part of those birth
cohorts. Um And, and I think that got us
going in that way, but the subsequent categories have
no official status. And that's actually why the group
of researchers and I approached the Pew Research Center
because people had, people had, were clearly identifying the
Pew categories um as sort of the standard categories
and, and Pew had sort of an explainer website
where they said like this is how we, this
is how we drew the lines here and they
had some vaguely empirical bases about September 11th or
the internet or something like that. Um But they
basically just said we're gonna use the, they said
we know they're basically arbitrary, but once you name
them and you use them, they start getting some,
they start carrying their own weight. So these are
that we're gonna kind of use them in a
consistent way, at least. Um And so Pew is
very influential and that was the closest we had.
Um Gallup, another polling organization also um uh uh
has been influential but there's nothing, there's no official
status to these. Um And if you think about
the, um, uh, if you think about how the
mile, the, the milestones in life have changed, you
know, we raised, we lowered the voting age from
21 to 18. We raised the drinking age to
21. Um, WE have raised the retirement age is
on a schedule to, to, to gradually rise in
the US with, um, social security. So even to
the extent that there are official markers, um, they,
they flex, you know, they vary over time as
the population changes and the imperatives of those bureaucracies
change.
Mhm. Yeah, that's the other thing because even when
it comes to, uh, what we label as being
involved in a particular, uh, society and in a
particular time period, it varies across the time and
cultural context. Right? That's just an example, of course.
Yeah, I mean, I think if you, in the
US, we've had periods where people are very upset
about teen pregnancy. Um, uh, YOU know, women having
women being pregnant and having Children, you know, in
their teen years. Well, that usually meant before 18
because 18 they're adults. And, you know, and if
you look at teen teen pregnancy in the 19
fifties, um, they almost all got married between the
pregnancy and the birth. Um, SO we had a
lot, we have a lot of people whose birth,
whose first birth was less than nine months after
their marriage at that time. Um, AND, and people
were not upset about teen births if the woman
was married. So, so really the idea of the,
the distress over the social problem of teen pregnancy
and childbirth, which often is a problem, of course,
and it is often, you know, it's not consensual,
it's not planned, it has negative consequences, but it
was really, it was really only in the context
of not marriage. Uh AND specifically in the context
where women had other opportunities. So they, so, you
know, when we were upset about teen pregnancy and
childbirth in the eighties and nineties was partly because
women could go to college. And if they were
having a child at age 17 or 18, their
chance of going to college and having a successful
lucrative career was, was negatively impacted. If that was
not the case, then you wouldn't necessarily be so
upset about women having Children at age 17. You
know, in some senses, you know, biologically, it works
pretty well. You know, it's only a problem if
it's not consensual, if it has negative consequences if
they're, if they don't have adequate social support, if
it's not what they want, um, which is, you
know, often the case. But, um, anyway, so these,
these things change. That's all I'm saying. I can't
remember the question.
So, uh, earlier, we've touched a little bit on
stereotypes. I mean, sometimes it's very unfortunate because even
here in Portugal, even just recently, uh, journalists did
a few pieces on how supposedly people from generation
Z are lazier and they are more demanding in
their jobs and stuff like that. I mean, I,
I don't know if there's any specific research on
this, but if there's those stereotypes circulating around and
particularly on mainstream media, couldn't it be the case
that perhaps some of these people would even be
discriminated when it comes to getting a job just
because the employers have the sense that, oh, let's
avoid the employing people from Gen Z because they
might uh II, I mean, they might create problems
in our company or something like that.
Yeah. So, um the stereotypes for young people interviewing
today include um they look at their phones during
the job interview, they bring their parents to a
job interview. Um THEY make unreasonable demands um about
um things that they should be grateful for like
having a coffee machine in the office or something,
snacks. Um AND sort of this, right, this spoiled
um uh privileged attitude, of course, very socioeconomically specific.
Um But also quite wrong. Ok. But, you know,
things have changed. Um, SO, you know, the law
is different in different places, age discrimination is a,
is a real thing. Um, uh, IT'S not necessarily
illegal in all cases but in some cases it
is specifically illegal. Um, AND, um, there, there, there
was a, there was a little back and forth
that I was, uh, uh, played a small role
in when the, our National Academy of Sciences um
did a um a study on um the use
of generation categories in employment, um decisions, hiring and
um and personnel management. And the idea was there
were some people saying, and there's a whole industry
of consultants basically who will tell employers this is
how you should deal with, you know, kids these
days. Um If you want to recruit the best
talent and hired and how to, how to treat
them and how not to treat them and, and
it's, it's a combination of like a lot of
business consulting, of stereotyping and certain kinds of insights.
Um On the other hand, um it can be
a very pernicious and harmful if you're applying stereotypes
based on age or birth year without considering the
realities of the person in front of you. Um
So you have to have reasonable, you know, uh
if your, if your, if your workforce is all
over age 60 you probably wanna have um like
make sure that you have adequate um uh physical
access for people who have trouble climbing stairs. Right.
That may be a, but you probably, you should
do that regardless of the age of your employ.
But, um, but it may be like a sudden
imperative if you had a big influx of older
workers. Right. So, there's this kind of this back
and forth where, um, you know, we should do
things universally, we should treat people equally and according
to their own behavior and qualities and characteristics. But
on the other hand, there are trends and patterns
that we want to pay attention to. Um So,
and that's a reasonable back and forth um of
thinking about how the world is changing and how
we should respond. There are great advantages to what
they call universal design with regard to disability. You
know, everybody benefits from having all, all text on
an image on the, on social media, you know,
a text that describes what the image is because
it helps people, it helps machines, read them and
it helps uh and people who are visually impaired,
everybody should have um all cities should have curb
cuts on their curbs at street corners because it
makes everybody's life easier and better in addition to
people who use wheelchairs. Ok. But um uh the
the idea of, of, of a rigidly attaching those
to age categories is where it becomes, you know,
um harmful.
So now let me ask you this, what is
supposed to come after the Z since now we
are at generation Z and Z is the last
letter of the alphabet. So what comes next?
Um, I think people are already using alpha for
what's next. Um, UNLESS that's alpha is also Z,
no, I think alpha is supposed to be what's
next. Um, YOU know, if we settled into a
habit of, um, of arbitrary names like numbers or
alphabet and fixed, fixed lengths, that wouldn't be the
end of the world. But in that case, we
may as well just use decades and call them
decades. Um But um I think what you will
see and you already see is sort of a
scramble for naming rights. Um The person who the
person who names them and has their name stick,
um can become a popular consultant and sell books
and um uh and uh and have uh and
get positive attention maybe for the better, maybe for
the worse. So, um uh uh one thing that
happens with that is in the competition to name
the next generation, they tend to get shorter because
one comparative advantage in that competition is to get
your label to stick sooner. So you have to
kind of roll it out quick. So I think
if, if, if, if they don't become standardized in
some way, I think we'll see this continued pressure
to shorten generations and come up with um attractive
names for them. I mean, millennial worked because it
had to do with the millennium it had to
do with the changing, with the year 2000. Um
So there was kind of, there was sort of
a logic to it and after that it was
sort of like, oh, Z, you know, we're like,
we're done with this. Um But of course, we're
not done with this. It's like an addiction. Um
So, so they stick. Um And, you know, we've
made, we, you know, reasonable, social scientists have made
some progress on this. I think we have successfully
stig the use of the categories in serious research
um without an empirical basis in some quarters, at
least, but I don't really believe we're gonna stop
this practice and, you know, in the long run,
it's not that important, but as long as we
just have to realize that possible downsides. So I
don't know what they're gonna be called next, probably.
Um uh YOU know, maybe somebody will think, oh,
it should be reasonable. Let's just use alphabet letters,
but nobody's gonna wanna be b you know, if
you have, you know, if generation A or alpha
um beta just sounds terrible and nobody wants to
be that. So I assume there will be um
you know, there'll be some, some something else will
come along before um generation alpha is even done
and the alphabet thing won't stick.
But do you see a positive trend when it
comes to how people use generation labels? I mean,
do you see that for example, as you and
some of your other colleagues pointed to these issues
that some people at least are dropping the use
of generation labels in their work or not. Yes,
I think so. I mean, if I looked at
the, um I looked at the occurrence of terms
in the, in the social science literature and it
really is quite concentrated in business and psychology now
and business is really taking off. Um And so
my knock on business research is, it's often, you
know, not serious research, it's sort of fatty, it
has to do with. Um um YOU know, people
trying to um just get generate attention for their
consulting jobs. It's a total stereotype. It's completely unfair.
So I, you know, I'm, I, I apologize. Um
BUT it seems to be concentrated highly in business,
which is interesting. Um And it, you know, it's,
it's, it has to do a little bit with
the way business researchers communicate who they communicate with
and so on. Um But I'm happy that um
economists and sociologists and historians are not using these
terms very much. Um uh A a and I
do think there's, there's also a recognition in the
public, I think, um of their arbitrariness and that's
why, you know, sometimes it seems like wasting effort,
like, oh, I'm a millennial but I don't feel
like a millennial. You could have just skipped both
of those statements and got and moved on with
your life. 10 seconds earlier. But, but it is
a way of framing, it's a way of putting,
you know, putting yourself in historical context and there's
a, you know, the generation gap, I mean, um,
interestingly, um, you know, these generations are getting shorter,
um, human generations are getting longer and because of
low birth rates in some ways the generations are
getting closer together, um, in, in that the parents
have fewer Children, grandparents have fewer grandchildren. Um And
their lives are longer. Um, YOU know, a grandparent
may now have a 70 year relationship with two
grandchildren. You know, that's a very, that's a very
meaningful, I'm not 70 years right there. Uh But
more like a, a 50 year relationship with two
grandchildren, you know, that's it, that could be developed
into a very meaningful adult um uh uh relationship
over a long period of time and can actually
draw generations closer together. Grandparents all have 25 grandchildren.
They can't even remember all their names and they
die when they're 60. Um Then, um it's not
uh uh it's a different kind of intergenerational relationship.
So actually, we have great potential for um for
vertical generational relationships, improving and deepening uh over historical
time. Um And then like slicing them all up
into um like in our family. Um We have
no, um there's no baby boomers in my family.
My parents were born before the baby boom and
me and my sibling were born after the baby
boom. There's no baby boomers in our, and that's
not so unusual. The generations are getting further apart.
My parents were slightly older when they had their
Children. Um, THEN, you know, than some other people,
like just the, the baby boom squeezed right into
that moment for them. So, um, uh uh uh,
the, uh, I mean, we may, we may just
find that there are other ways to express our
generational, um, affinities and affiliations besides these categories, hopefully.
Mhm So let me just ask you one last
question. Then when it comes to your own work,
we've already talked about throughout the interview, demographic trends.
But you also do work on family structure, the
division of labor, health disparities. Do you see or
think that generation labels have affected or could affect
in any way, research on those topics that you
are interested in?
Well, they mostly um the labels mostly occur as
noise um in the sense that if you, so,
you know, everything I do, I'm looking at like
marriage or divorce rates over time. Um And so
the, the, you know, the year of birth is
a very important element in that um you know,
people who are uh uh people who get married
at a young age are much more likely to
get divorced and people who get married in certain
periods are more likely to get divorced. So you
have to weigh those two factors, the age and
the period um which together makes cohort. Um So
we have to think about these things. If, if,
if people um collapse their data into categories without
reason. At the start of this, it becomes noise
because you have to immediately ask, is this category
working, right? So like if I look at the,
is it concealing very important variation? Am I, am
I splitting Venus and Serena Williams? Um uh IN
a way that um that undermines my ability to
actually understand what was happening in the 19 eighties,
you know, so there's, it, it, it um as
soon as you start using the categories, you have
to pull them apart and see if they make
sense and then maybe they do, maybe they don't,
but it would just be random at that point.
So, um it, it introduces noise and sort of
aggravation without, without introducing any clarity. Um Now, like
I said, if I use decades, that may have
the same effect, so I may start with decades
and then say, well, wait a second, let's actually
be careful here because um you know, 2009 was
a very big year. Um And so maybe I
wanna break these apart. So you may end up
in a similar process this but you don't start
with a name and a label and an assumption
that it matters. You start with a recognition that
you used some arbitrary categories for convenience and then
maybe check to make sure that you're not obscuring
important variation when you do that. I imagine it's
similar. II, I won't say anything about biology but
the identification of species is a big issue in
biology. I'm, I'm aware and it's not always so
cut and dry and you definitely don't want to
um um you know, assume your categories before you
do the research. That's all
great. So, just before we go, would you like
to tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet?
Oh, sure. Um So, uh uh my website is
Philip N cohen.com. It's Philip with one L. Um
So um you can see everything there. I have
a blog called Family Inequality. Um And if you
look for the generations tag there, you'll see all
the many, many rants and tirades. I've written about
generations um uh uh on that, on that subject
and the other topics II I work on. So,
um I, I am I thank you. I hope
people will visit.
Yeah, sure. I'm leaving some links to that in
the description of the interview and Philip. Thank you
so much again for doing this. It's been a
fun conversation.
It really has. Thank you very much. I appreciate
it.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitting Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors,
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel S
friends, David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego,
Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt,
Pavlo Stassi Nale Medicine, Gary G Alman Sam of
Zed YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott
Zachary FTDW Daniel Friedman, William Buckner. Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David
Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey junior, Old
Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then spur by Robert Grassy
Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica. No week, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi
Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos net. A
special thanks to my producers is our web, Jim
Frank Lucani. Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon
Benedikt Mueller Thomas Rumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John
Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to
my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knit
and Rosie. Thank you for all.